When Vladimir Putin shattered the peace in Europe by unleashing war on a democracy of 44 million people, his justification was that modern, Western-leaning Ukraine was a constant threat and Russia could not feel "safe, develop and exist".

But after almost five weeks of bombardment, thousands of deaths in ruined cities and the displacement of 10 million people inside Ukraine and beyond, the questions remain: what is his aim and is there a way out?

What was Putin's goal?
The Russian leader's initial aim was to overrun Ukraine and depose its government, ending for good its desire to join the Western defensive alliance Nato. But the invasion has become bogged down and he appears to have scaled back his ambitions.

Launching the invasion on 24 February he told the Russian people his goal was to "demilitarise and de-Nazify Ukraine", to protect people subjected to what he called eight years of bullying and genocide by Ukraine's government. "It is not our plan to occupy the Ukrainian territory. We do not intend to impose anything on anyone by force," he insisted.

This was not even a war or invasion, he claimed, merely the fiction of a "special military operation" that Russian state-controlled media are required to adopt.

The claims of Nazis and genocide in Ukraine were completely unfounded, but it was clear Russia saw this as a pivotal moment. "Russia's future and its future place in the world are at stake," said foreign intelligence chief Sergei Naryshkin.

Russia's military aimed to sweep into the capital Kyiv, invading from Belarus in the north, as well as from the south and east.

Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov spoke of freeing Ukraine from oppression, while Ukraine's democratically elected President Volodymyr Zelensky said "the enemy has designated me as target number one; my family is target number two".

But Ukraine's fierce resistance has caused heavy losses and, in some areas, driven Russian forces back.
Has Putin changed his aims?
Russia does appear to have lowered its ambitions, claiming it has "generally accomplished" the aims of the invasion's first phase, which it defined as considerably reducing Ukraine's combat potential.

At peace talks in Istanbul, Russia said it would be "drastically reducing" its military operations around the capital, and around the northern city of Chernihiv.

Ukraine's President Zelensky said signals from the talks could be called positive, but that they did not drown out the explosions from Russian shells. He said Ukraine could only trust a concrete result, not words.

The war continues in the east and the south, where Russian forces are trying to create a land corridor along the south coast, east from Crimea to the Russian border.

A month into the invasion, Russia declared its main goal was the "liberation of Donbas" - broadly referring to Ukraine's eastern regions of Luhansk and Donetsk. More than a third of this area was already seized by Russian-backed separatists in a war that began in 2014.
Ahead of the war it was clear President Putin wanted all of the east, recognising the whole area as belonging to two Russian puppet statelets. The head of the Luhansk statelet has suggested holding a referendum on joining Russia, similar to an internationally discredited vote held in Crimea in 2014.

Beyond his military goals, President Putin's broader demand is to ensure Ukraine's future neutrality. The Ukrainians have offered that in return for security guarantees from allies, as part of a wide-ranging peace plan presented in talks in Turkey.

Why Putin wants a neutral Ukraine
Since Ukraine achieved independence in 1991, as the Soviet Union collapsed, it has gradually veered towards the West - both the EU and Nato.

Russia's leader has sought to reverse that, seeing the fall of the Soviet Union as the "disintegration of historical Russia". He has claimed Russians and Ukrainians are one people and denied Ukraine its long history: "Ukraine never had stable traditions of genuine statehood," he asserted.

It was his pressure on Ukraine's pro-Russian leader, Viktor Yanukovych, not to sign a deal with the European Union in 2013 that led to protests that ultimately ousted the Ukrainian president in February 2014.

Russia then seized Ukraine's southern region of Crimea and triggered a separatist rebellion in the east and a war that claimed 14,000 lives.

As he prepared to invade in February, he tore up an unfulfilled 2015 Minsk peace deal and accused Nato of threatening "our historic future as a nation", claiming without foundation that Nato countries wanted to bring war to Crimea.

What would neutrality look like?
Before Ukraine presented its plans, Russia said it was considering a "neutral, demilitarised" Ukraine with its own army and navy, along the lines of Austria or Sweden, which are both EU members. Austria is neutral, while Sweden is non-aligned.

President Zelensky had already declared that Ukrainians now understood they would will not be admitted to Nato: "It's a truth and it must be recognised."
Under Ukraine's Istanbul peace proposals:

Ukraine would become a "non-bloc (or non-aligned) and non-nuclear" state, with no foreign military bases or contingents on its territory
Strict, legally binding guarantees would require countries such as the UK, China, the USA, Turkey, France, Canada, Italy, Poland and Israel to protect a neutral Ukraine in the event of attack
Within three days guarantor states would have to hold consultations and come to Ukraine's defence
Ukraine would be allowed to join the European Union
Ukraine would not enter military-political alliances and any international exercises would require consent of guarantor states.
Ukraine's bid to join Nato (and the EU) is enshrined in its 2019 constitution, so any change would require a referendum some months later.

What about Crimea and the east?
Under Ukraine's plan, the future status of Crimea, seized by Russia in 2014, would be decided during 15 years of consultations. And during that time there would be no military action to resolve the issue.

As part of the peace proposals, all Russian troops would leave Ukrainian territory and the future of the eastern areas held by Russian-backed separatists would be discussed by the two presidents as part of a ceasefire summit.

Russia has yet to respond to the proposals and says there is still a long way to go, although it sees the Ukrainian offer as a "step towards us".

President Putin will come under pressure not to abandon any territorial gains made during the war, especially as the declared aim is "liberating" Ukraine's east. Kyiv, meanwhile, will never agree to ceding its sovereign territory.

While Russia's call for Ukraine's demilitarisation appears to have been dealt with, two other demands may have fallen away altogether: that of "de-Nazification", and having Russian recognised as a second language in Ukraine.

Russia's claims of Nazism are unfounded, and Ukraine's foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba has said bluntly: "It's crazy, sometimes not even they can explain what they are referring to."

Ukraine's president has said he is prepared to give Russian minority language status, along with the languages of other neighbouring countries, and does not see this as a major issue.

What's Putin's problem with Nato?
For Russia's leader the West's 30-member defensive military alliance has one aim - to split society in Russia and ultimately destroy it.

Ahead of the war, he demanded that Nato turn the clock back to 1997 and reverse its eastward expansion, removing its forces and military infrastructure from member states that joined the alliance from 1997 and not deploying "strike weapons near Russia's borders". That means Central Europe, Eastern Europe and the Baltics.
In President Putin's eyes, the West promised back in 1990 that Nato would expand "not an inch to the east", but did so anyway.

That was before the collapse of the Soviet Union, however, so the promise made to then Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev only referred to East Germany in the context of a reunified Germany. Mr Gorbachev said later that "the topic of Nato expansion was never discussed" at the time.

Does Putin have designs beyond Ukraine?
If he has, his military setbacks in Ukraine may have put paid to any wider ambitions beyond Ukraine.

After hours of conversations with Russia's authoritarian leader, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz concluded: "Putin wants to build a Russian empire... He wants to fundamentally redefine the status quo within Europe in line with his own vision. And he has no qualms about using military force to do so."

Tatiana Stanovaya of analysis firm RPolitik and the Carnegie Moscow Center fears a spiral in a new Cold War confrontation: "I have very firm feelings that we should get prepared for a new ultimatum to the West which will be more militarised and aggressive than we could have imagined."

Having witnessed Mr Putin's willingness to lay waste European cities to achieve his aims, Western leaders are now under no illusion. President Joe Biden has labelled him a war criminal and the leaders of both Germany and France see this war as a turning point in the history of Europe.

Before the war, Russia demanded all US nuclear arms be barred from beyond their national territories. The US had offered to start talks on limiting short- and medium-range missiles, as well as on a new treaty on intercontinental missiles, but there is little chance of that happening for now.
What next for Russia itself?
President Putin has been stunned by the scale of the Western response to his invasion. He knew Nato's members would never put boots on the ground in Ukraine, but he could not have guessed the extent of the sanctions that are already having a dramatic effect on Russia's economy - and he is furious.

The EU, US, UK and other Western nations have targeted Russia's economy in a variety of ways:

Russia's central bank has had its assets frozen and major banks are shut out of the international SWIFT payment transfer network.
The US has banned imports of Russian oil and gas; the EU aims to cut gas imports by two-thirds within a year; and the UK aims to phase out Russian oil by the end of 2022
Germany has halted approval on Russia's Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, a major investment by both Russia and European companies
Russian airlines have been barred from airspace over the EU, UK, US and Canada
Personal sanctions have been imposed on President Putin, Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and many other individuals
No peace deal with Ukraine will bring these sanctions to an end, and Vladimir Putin knows that. Instead he has turned on Russians who have opposed the war. "The Russian people will always be able to distinguish true patriots from scum and traitors," said Russia's president.

More than 15,100 anti-war protesters have been detained and virtually all independent media have been silenced.

There is no meaningful political opposition left as they have either fled the country, or in the case of opposition leader Alexei Navalny, jailed for years in a strict-regime penal colony.
Russian forces have lost ground around Kyiv in recent days and it appears they have given up on their attempts to encircle the city for now, according to the Institute for the Study of War (ISW).

Ukrainian forces have successfully pushed Russian troops back in a number of areas on the outskirts of Kyiv, including in the suburb of Irpin about 20km (12 miles) to the west.

This has kept Russian artillery out of range of central Kyiv, but shelling of the suburbs has continued to cause casualties and destroy homes and infrastructure - and the city remains vulnerable to missile attacks from the air.
To the east of the capital, Ukrainian forces have reclaimed ground from the Russians around the suburb of Brovary, about 20km (12 miles) away from the centre of Kyiv.

The Russian advance on Kyiv from the east has been hindered by the failure to take control of Chernihiv, a major city to the north-east that sits between the capital and the Russian border.

Chernihiv's governor says there has been no let-up in attacks by Russia so far, despite Moscow's pledge to reduce military activity there and around Kyiv in an effort to "boost mutual trust" in peace talks.
Standing in the way of that objective has been the port city of Mariupol, which has been encircled by Russian forces since the start of March.

Russian forces have been advancing further into the centre of Mariupol in recent days and the city is likely to fall within days, according to the ISW.

More than 100,000 civilians are thought to be trapped in the besieged city and its deputy mayor says people are starting to die from starvation and dehydration.
To the west, Russia has been attempting to push towards Odesa, with the aim of cutting off Ukraine's access to the Black Sea.

But their advances stalled at Mykolaiv, where a counter-attack by Ukrainian troops has pushed Russian forces back towards the city of Kherson.

Ukrainian resistance around Kherson is continuing to stop any Russian advances in the area, according to the ISW.

Russia targets full control in the east
With recent setbacks elsewhere in the country, the chief of the Russian army said last week that the focus of its forces is the "complete liberation" of the Donbas.

The Donbas is made up of the Donestk and Luhansk regions, where Russian-backed separatists held significant territory before the Russian invasion at the end of February.

Russian forces in the region are concentrating efforts on encircling Ukrainian forces, advancing from Kharkiv to the north and Mariupol from the south, the MoD says.

Western officials say several thousand Russian troops are on their way to the region and forces are also now being redeployed there from other areas of Ukraine, according to the ISW.
About these maps
To indicate which parts of Ukraine are under control by Russian troops we are using daily assessments published by the Institute for the Study of War with the American Enterprise Institute's Critical Threats Project.

From 2 March this daily assessment differentiated between "Assessed Russian-controlled Ukrainian territory" and "Assessed Russian advances in Ukraine", the latter indicating areas where Russians are believed to have launched attacks from but which they do not control.

To show key areas where advances are taking place we are also using daily updates from the UK Ministry of Defence and BBC research.
The situation in Ukraine is fast moving and it is likely there will be times when there have been changes not reflected in the maps.
Russia pledged during Tuesday's peace talks in Turkey that it would "drastically reduce" attacks near two Ukrainian cities as a confidence-building gesture. But Ukrainian military leaders said Russia was probably using the maneuvers to "mislead" and was merely rotating its troops. Western leaders also expressed skepticism, and British Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the Russians should be judged by "their actions, not their words."

Ukrainian assertions that it was pushing back Russian forces near Kyiv - where Moscow said it would scale back its assault - generally appear to be true, according to a Washington Post reporter on the ground. But heavy shelling continues elsewhere, and new satellite images of the bombed-out southern port city of Mariupol document severe damage to civilian infrastructure. The photos depict long lines outside a grocery store in the city, where local leaders have warned of a severe shortage of basic necessities.

Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky, in a video address released late Tuesday, said Moscow's assurances "do not silence the explosion of Russian shells." Kyiv's negotiators in Istanbul said they could exchange military neutrality for security guarantees, and an adviser to Zelensky said Ukraine was working with 10 nations - including the United States, Britain, China and Israel - on a security agreement that would ensure the "horrors that the Russians have brought to the Ukrainian people" are never repeated.
Russian troops continue to fight to hold their current front-line position near Kyiv, and they are likely attempting to connect gains southeast of Kharkiv with their front line in the Luhansk region.

The Kremlin on Tuesday signaled that it will keep fighting for Mariupol and said that unless "Ukrainian nationalist militants" stop resisting and lay down their arms, it will be difficult to "resolve the acute humanitarian situation" there.
Thousands of civilians may have died in the besieged southern Ukrainian city of Mariupol, the head of the United Nations' human rights mission in Ukraine said Tuesday.

"We do think that there could be thousands of deaths, of civilian casualties, in Mariupol," head of mission Matilda Bogner said in an interview with Reuters. She added that her staff was trying to gather information for a more precise estimate.

The port city of Mariupol has borne the brunt of bombardment by Russia, resulting in shortages of food, water and medicines. Communications have also been largely cut off. Control of the city remains a strategic goal for Russia and would allow its forces to establish a land corridor connecting territories under its control.

The International Committee of the Red Cross said in a statement Tuesday that it has made "detailed proposals regarding safe passage and evacuations for civilians to ease the massive suffering taking place in Mariupol." But the agency added that no "concrete agreements needed to move forward" have yet been reached.

The ICRC said civilians in the city, once home to almost 450,000 people, were making "life-and-death" decisions to flee. Fragile humanitarian corridors have allowed hundreds of people in private vehicles and others on buses to be evacuated over the past few days, but Ukrainian officials and aid agencies are calling for more. "Time is running out for civilians in Mariupol," the ICRC warned.
